DOC: update 1.5.0 release notes (#12221)
scipy/scipy: doc/release/1.5.0-notes.rst

Highlights of this release
--------------------------

- wrapers for more than a dozen new ``LAPACK`` routines are now available
  in `scipy.linalg.lapack`

> - `scipy.optimize` ``minimize`` methods using finite difference numerical 

Author: @mdhaber Suggestions for rewording here?

> - `scipy.optimize` ``minimize`` methods using finite difference numerical 

Author: I was summarizing 18 lines of release notes content into one highlight--a bunch of stuff got better in `optimize`; if they want to pick the most important of those improvements I'll change it.

> - `scipy.optimize` ``minimize`` methods using finite difference numerical 

Author: I've cut that highlight out completely based on the feedback

Highlights of this release
--------------------------

- wrappers for more than a dozen new ``LAPACK`` routines are now available

>   in `scipy.linalg.lapack`

Reviewer: Do we want to acknowledge NumFOCUS' support of this effort?  (e.g. "thanks to the support of a NumFOCUS small development grant")

Author: I'm not aware of a precedent for this in our release notes for other things like GSOC, etc., so not sure I'm comfortable adding at this stage.

- `scipy.optimize.minimize` methods using finite difference numerical 

>   differentiation have gained several new features and there have been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  differentiation have gained several new features, and there have been
```

>   performance improvements in `scipy.optimize.linprog` and minimization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  performance improvements in minimization
```
Thanks, but I don't think those performance enhancements deserve a highlight.  (gh-12043 certainly would, but it looks like that's getting bumped.)

  evaluations using a Hessian approximation
- Improved support for leveraging 64-bit integer size from linear algebra
  backends

New features
============

`scipy.cluster` improvements
------------------------------
Initialization of `scipy.cluster.vq.kmeans2` using ``minit="++"`` had a 
quadratic complexity in the number of samples. It has been improved, resulting 

> in a now much faster, with quasi-linear complexity, initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a much faster initialization with quasi-linear complexity.
```

The caching of values when optimizing a function returning both value and 
gradient together has been improved, avoiding repeated function evaluations 
when using a ``HessianApproximation`` such as ``BFGS``.

``differential_evolution`` can now use the modern ``np.random.Generator`` as 
well as the legacy ``np.random.RandomState`` as a seed.

`scipy.signal` improvements
---------------------------
A new optional argument ``include_nyquist`` is added to ``freqz`` functions in 
this module. It is used for including the last frequency (Nyquist frequency).

`scipy.signal.find_peaks_cwt` now accepts a ``window_size`` parameter for the 
size of the window used to calculate the noise floor.

`scipy.sparse` improvements
---------------------------
Outer indexing is now faster when using a 2d column vector to select column 
indices.

`scipy.sparse.lil.tocsr` is faster

`scipy.spatial` improvements
----------------------------
`scipy.spatial.geometric_slerp` has been added to enable geometric 
spherical linear interpolation on an n-sphere

`scipy.spatial.SphericalVoronoi` now supports calculation of region areas in 2D 
and 3D cases

`scipy.special` improvements
--------------------------

> The inverse error function and complimentary inverse error function now 
> provide a Cython interface and are now accessible as 
> `scipy.special.cython_special.erfinv` and `scipy.special.cython_special.erfcinv`
> respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following functions now have Cython interfaces in `cython_special`:

- `special.erfinv`
- `special.erfcinv`
- `special.spherical_jn`
- `special.spherical_yn`
- `special.spherical_in`
- `special.spherical_kn`
```

random number generation (e.g. random variates from distributions) can now use 
the modern ``np.random.Generator`` as well as the legacy 
``np.random.RandomState`` as a seed.

The ``axis`` parameter was added to `scipy.stats.rankdata`. This allows slices 
of an array along the given axis to be ranked independently.

The ``axis`` parameter was added to `scipy.stats.f_oneway`, allowing it compute 
multiple one-way ANOVA tests for data stored in n-dimensional arrays.

The PDF and CDF methods for ``stats.geninvgauss`` are now significantly faster 
as  the numerical integration to calculate the CDF uses a Cython based 
``LowLevelCallable``.

Moments of the normal distribution (`scipy.stats.norm`) are now calculated using 
analytical formulas instead of numerical integration for greater speed and 
accuracy

Moments and entropy trapezoidal distribution (`scipy.stats.trapz`) are now 
calculated using analytical formulas instead of numerical integration for 
greater speed and accuracy

Methods of the truncated normal distribution (`scipy.stats.truncnorm`), 
especially ``_rvs``, are significantly faster after a complete rewrite.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

The `fit` method of the Laplace distribution,  `scipy.stats.laplace`, now uses the
analytical formulas for the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters.

```

> 

Reviewer 4: This is for #11736
```suggestion
Input validations and intuitive exception messages are added for ``UnivariateSpline``,  ``RectSphereBivariateSpline``, `RectBivariateSpline``, ``SmoothSphereBivariateSpline``, `` LSQSphereBivariateSpline``, ``SmoothBivariateSpline``, ``LSQBivariateSpline``, ``LSQUnivariateSpline``, ``InterpolatedUnivariateSpline``, and ``UnivariateSpline`` functions.
```

- ``?gesc2``: solves a linear system given an LU factorization from ``?getc2``
- ``?gejsv``: computes the singular value decomposition of a general matrix 
with higher accuracy calculation of tiny singular values and their 
corresponding singular vectors
- ``?geqrfp``: computes the QR factorization of a general matrix with 
non-negative elements on the diagonal of R
- ``?gtsvx``: solves a linear system with general tridiagonal matrix
- ``?gttrf``: computes the LU factorization of a tridiagonal matrix
- ``?gttrs``: solves a linear system given an LU factorization from ``?gttrf``
- ``?ptsvx``: solves a linear system with symmetric positive definite 
tridiagonal matrix
- ``?pttrf``: computes the LU factorization of a symmetric positive definite 
tridiagonal matrix
- ``?pttrs``: solves a linear system given an LU factorization from ``?pttrf``
- ``?pteqr``: computes the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of a positive definite 
tridiagonal matrix
- ``?tbtrs``: solves a linear system with a triangular banded matrix
- ``?csd``: computes the Cosine Sine decomposition of an orthogonal/unitary 
matrix

Generalized QR factorization routines (``?geqrf``) now have full ``_lwork`` 
counterparts.

> `scipy.linalg.cossin` Cosine Sine decomposition of unitary matrices has been 

Reviewer 5: we had this discussion but we couldn't came up with anything better and it is kind of what everybody goes with. So we counted on the fact that it is under linalg namespace. But yes I would really appreciate a better one.

> `scipy.linalg.cossin` Cosine Sine decomposition of unitary matrices has been 

Reviewer 6: either `csd` (in analogy with `svd`) or a more explicit `cossin_decomp` would be better imho

> `scipy.linalg.cossin` Cosine Sine decomposition of unitary matrices has been 

Reviewer 5: `csd` is already overloaded in [`scipy.signal.csd`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.signal.csd.html) and some circles already use it for a shortcut to cumulative power spectral density. So that won't fly

Frankly, `cossin_decomp` is even uglier than `cossin` also becomes a one-off since the others don't have it. 

Why I prefer `cossin` is that there is nothing called `cossin` in any trig libraries. And you can't accidentally fall to that namespace.

  obeys those limits.
- The numerical differentiation machinery now makes use of a simple cache, 
  which in some cases can reduce the number of function evaluations.

There have been several improvements to `scipy.optimize.linprog`:

- The ``linprog`` benchmark suite has been expanded considerably.
- ``linprog``'s dense pivot-based redundancy removal routine and sparse 
  presolve are faster
- When ``scikit-sparse`` is available, solving sparse problems with 
  ``method='interior-point'`` is faster

The caching of values when optimizing a function returning both value and 
gradient together has been improved, avoiding repeated function evaluations 
when using a ``HessianApproximation`` such as ``BFGS``.

``differential_evolution`` can now use the modern ``np.random.Generator`` as 
well as the legacy ``np.random.RandomState`` as a seed.

`scipy.signal` improvements
---------------------------
A new optional argument ``include_nyquist`` is added to ``freqz`` functions in 
this module. It is used for including the last frequency (Nyquist frequency).

`scipy.signal.find_peaks_cwt` now accepts a ``window_size`` parameter for the 
size of the window used to calculate the noise floor.

> 

Reviewer 4: This is for #11347
```suggestion
Input validations and intuitive exceptions messages are added for ``buttord``, ``cheb1ord``, ``cheb2ord`` functions.
```

`scipy.sparse` improvements
---------------------------
Outer indexing is now faster when using a 2d column vector to select column 
indices.

`scipy.sparse.lil.tocsr` is faster

Fixed/improved comparisons between pydata sparse arrays and sparse matrices

BSR format sparse multiplication performance has been improved.

`scipy.spatial` improvements
----------------------------
`scipy.spatial.geometric_slerp` has been added to enable geometric 
spherical linear interpolation on an n-sphere

`scipy.spatial.SphericalVoronoi` now supports calculation of region areas in 2D 
and 3D cases

New ``cKDTree`` benchmarks are available for building and querying of balanced/

> unbalanced kd-trees.

Reviewer 6: The benchmarks are nice, but the more interesting part is that the performance improved a lot for some cases - see gh-11653. That should be mentioned here.

`scipy.special` improvements
--------------------------
The following functions now have Cython interfaces in `cython_special`:

- `scipy.special.erfinv`
- `scipy.special.erfcinv`
- `scipy.special.spherical_jn`
- `scipy.special.spherical_yn`
- `scipy.special.spherical_in`
- `scipy.special.spherical_kn`

`scipy.special.log_softmax` has been added to calculate the logarithm of softmax 
function. It provides better accuracy than ``log(scipy.special.softmax(x))`` for 
inputs that make softmax saturate.

`scipy.stats` improvements
--------------------------
The function for generating random samples in `scipy.stats.dlaplace` has been 
improved. The new function generates random samples by calculating the 
difference between two independent and identically distributed geometric 
distributions. This new function is approximately twice as fast as the previous 
(default) function which generated samples by inverting the CDF. This new 
function also uses less memory than the previous function. For one sample, the 
new function uses ~25% less memory; for one million samples, it uses ~40% less 

> memory; for ten million samples, it uses ~60% less memory.

Reviewer 6: I'd suggest to shorten this a little. Something like ".... uses between 25% and 60% less memory (see `gh-xxxxx`)"

The `fit` method of the Laplace distribution,  `scipy.stats.laplace`, now uses the
analytical formulas for the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters.

Generation of random variates is now thread safe for all SciPy distributions. 
3rd-party distributions may need to modify the signature of the ``_rvs()`` 
method to conform to ``_rvs(self, ..., size=None, random_state=None)``. (A 
one-time VisibleDeprecationWarning is emitted when using non-conformant 
distributions.)

The Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided test statistic distribution 
(`scipy.stats.kstwo`) was added. Calculates the distribution of the K-S 
two-sided statistic ``D_n`` for a sample of size n, using a mixture of exact 
and asymptotic algorithms.

The new function ``median_abs_deviation`` replaces the deprecated 
``median_absolute_deviation``.

The ``wilcoxon`` function now computes the p-value for Wilcoxon's signed rank 
test using the exact distribution for inputs up to length 25.  The function has 
a new ``mode`` parameter to specify how the p-value is to be computed.  The 
default is ``"auto"``, which uses the exact distribution for inputs up to length 
25 and the normal approximation for larger inputs.

> Added a new cython-based implementation to evaluate guassian kernel estimates,

Reviewer 6: minor: cython -> Cython

which should improve the performance of ``gaussian_kde``

The ``winsorize`` function now has a ``nan_policy`` argument for refined
handling of ``nan`` input values.

Deprecated features
===================

`scipy` deprecations
--------------------

`scipy.special` changes
-----------------------
The ``bdtr``, ``bdtrc``, and ``bdtri`` functions are deprecating non-negative 
non-integral ``n`` arguments. With this release ``n>0`` is still supported for 
arbitrary ``n``. However, a deprecation warning is emitted notifying that 

> non-integral n will not be supported with SciPy ``1.7.0`` release.

Reviewer 6: I would shorten this to only the first sentence of the paragraph, the rest is fairly redundant.

`scipy.special` improvements
----------------------------
The following functions now have Cython interfaces in `cython_special`:

- `scipy.special.erfinv`
- `scipy.special.erfcinv`
- `scipy.special.spherical_jn`
- `scipy.special.spherical_yn`
- `scipy.special.spherical_in`
- `scipy.special.spherical_kn`

`scipy.special.log_softmax` has been added to calculate the logarithm of softmax 
function. It provides better accuracy than ``log(scipy.special.softmax(x))`` for 
inputs that make softmax saturate.

`scipy.stats` improvements
--------------------------
The function for generating random samples in `scipy.stats.dlaplace` has been 
improved. The new function is approximately twice as fast with a memory
footprint reduction between 25 % and 60 % (see gh-11069).

`scipy.stats` functions that accept a seed for reproducible calculations using 
random number generation (e.g. random variates from distributions) can now use 
the modern ``np.random.Generator`` as well as the legacy 
``np.random.RandomState`` as a seed.

The ``axis`` parameter was added to `scipy.stats.rankdata`. This allows slices 
of an array along the given axis to be ranked independently.

> The ``axis`` parameter was added to `scipy.stats.f_oneway`, allowing it compute 
> multiple one-way ANOVA tests for data stored in n-dimensional arrays. Some
> performance improvements to ``f_oneway`` as well.

Reviewer 3: Add the missing word `to`, and make the last phrase a sentence.
```suggestion
The ``axis`` parameter was added to `scipy.stats.f_oneway`, allowing it to
compute  multiple one-way ANOVA tests for data stored in n-dimensional
arrays.  The performance of ``f_oneway`` was also improved for some cases.
```

one-time VisibleDeprecationWarning is emitted when using non-conformant 
distributions.)

The Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided test statistic distribution 
(`scipy.stats.kstwo`) was added. Calculates the distribution of the K-S 
two-sided statistic ``D_n`` for a sample of size n, using a mixture of exact 
and asymptotic algorithms.

The new function ``median_abs_deviation`` replaces the deprecated 
``median_absolute_deviation``.

The ``wilcoxon`` function now computes the p-value for Wilcoxon's signed rank 
test using the exact distribution for inputs up to length 25.  The function has 
a new ``mode`` parameter to specify how the p-value is to be computed.  The 
default is ``"auto"``, which uses the exact distribution for inputs up to length 
25 and the normal approximation for larger inputs.

Added a new Cython-based implementation to evaluate guassian kernel estimates,
which should improve the performance of ``gaussian_kde``

The ``winsorize`` function now has a ``nan_policy`` argument for refined
handling of ``nan`` input values.

The ``binned_statistic_dd`` function with ``statistic="std"`` performance was
improved by ~4x.

> ``scipy.stats.kstest(rvs, cdf,...)`` now handles both one-sample and 

Reviewer 7: perhaps put the 'kstest' higher up next to the 'kstwo' item as they both relate to K-S statistics?

    matrix

Generalized QR factorization routines (``?geqrf``) now have full ``_lwork`` 
counterparts.

`scipy.linalg.cossin` Cosine Sine decomposition of unitary matrices has been 
added.

The function `scipy.linalg.khatri_rao`, which computes the Khatri-Rao product,
was added.

The new function `scipy.linalg.convolution_matrix` constructs the Toeplitz 
matrix representing one-dimensional convolution.

`scipy.ndimage` improvements
----------------------------

`scipy.optimize` improvements
-----------------------------
The finite difference numerical differentiation used in various ``minimize``
methods that use gradients has several new features:

- 2-point, 3-point, or complex step finite differences can be used. Previously 
  only a 2-step finite difference was available.
- There is now the possibility to use a relative step size, previously only an
  absolute step size was available.
- If the ``minimize`` method uses bounds the numerical differentiation strictly 
  obeys those limits.
- The numerical differentiation machinery now makes use of a simple cache, 
  which in some cases can reduce the number of function evaluations.

> 

Reviewer: - ``minimize``'s ``method= 'powell'` now supports simple bound constraints

`scipy.linalg` changes
----------------------
The output signatures of ``?syevr``, ``?heevr`` have been changed from 
``w, v, info`` to ``w, v, m, isuppz, info``

The order of output arguments ``w``, ``v`` of ``<sy/he>{gv, gvd, gvx}`` is 

> swapped.

Reviewer 6: Noting here for further review: check if these give hard errors; sounds like silently changing numerical values now.

Reviewer 5: Only the argument order is changed to match the remaining ones. So I don't know if we can raise errors based on that or how.

Reviewer 6: They do have different shape at least:
```
w : rank-1 array('d') with bounds (n)
v : rank-2 array('d') with bounds (n,n) and a storage
```

Still, it sounds like something to avoid. Was there a reason why it had to be done (e.g. infrastructure for a whole family of functions), or was it simply "let's make it consistent"?

Reviewer 5: Probably they were hardly ever used. Because their lwork argument was not correct. So both fixed and made consistent.

Reviewer 6: Okay that makes sense - I can try to add a sentence so that that bit doesn't read like people should go audit their code because we did something unusual.

`scipy.signal` changes
----------------------
The output length of `scipy.signal.upfirdn` has been corrected, resulting 
outputs may now be shorter for some combinations of up/down ratios and input 
signal and filter lengths.

`scipy.stats` changes
---------------------

Other changes
=============
Improved support for leveraging 64-bit integer size from linear algebra backends

> in several parts of the SciPy codebase.

Reviewer 8: This well might be in the highlights

Shims designed to ensure the compatibility of SciPy with Python 2.7 have now 
been removed.

Many warnings due to unused imports and unused assignments have been addressed.

> 

Reviewer 6: Also worth adding in this section: Many usage examples were added to function docstrings.

> Early stage adoption of ``mypy`` type hinting in a few parts of the codebase

Reviewer 6: It's not specific to mypy. Suggest to change "``mypy`` type hinting" to "type annotations".

`scipy.stats` changes
---------------------

Other changes
=============
Improved support for leveraging 64-bit integer size from linear algebra backends
in several parts of the SciPy codebase.

Shims designed to ensure the compatibility of SciPy with Python 2.7 have now 
been removed.

Many warnings due to unused imports and unused assignments have been addressed.

Many usage examples were added to function docstrings, and many input 
validations and intuitive exception messages have been added throughout the
codebase.

Early stage adoption of type annotations in a few parts of the codebase

Authors
=======

* @endolith
* Hameer Abbasi
* ADmitri +
* Wesley Alves +
* Berkay Antmen +
* Sylwester Arabas +
* Arne Küderle +
* Christoph Baumgarten
* Peter Bell
* Felix Berkenkamp
* Jordão Bragantini +
* Clemens Brunner +
* Evgeni Burovski
* Matthias Bussonnier +
* CJ Carey
* Derrick Chambers +
* Leander Claes +
* Christian Clauss
* Luigi F. Cruz +
* dankleeman
* Andras Deak
* Milad Sadeghi DM +
* jeremie du boisberranger +
* Stefan Endres
* Malte Esders +
* Leo Fang +
* felixhekhorn +
* Isuru Fernando
* Andrew Fowlie
* Lakshay Garg +
* Gaurav Gijare +

> * GitHub

Author: user `GitHub` shows up on every release &  I end up deleting manually; should probably figure out if that's leaking from incomplete `.mailmap` or something else
